About this time an ambitious young reporter from New
York arrived one morning at Gatsby’s door and asked him
if he had anything to say.
“Anything to say about what?” inquired Gatsby politely.
“Why — any statement to give out.”
It transpired after a confused five minutes that the man had
heard Gatsby’s name around his office in a connection which
he either wouldn’t reveal or didn’t fully understand. This was
his day off and with laudable initiative he had hurried out “to
see.”
It was a random shot, and yet the reporter’s instinct was
right. Gatsby’s notoriety, spread about by the hundreds who
had accepted his hospitality and so become authorities on his
past, had increased all summer until he fell just short of being
news. Contemporary legends such as the “underground pipe-
line to Canada.” attached themselves to him, and there was
one persistent story that he didn’t live in a house at all, but in a
boat that looked like a house and was moved secretly up and
down the Long Island shore. Just why these inventions were a
source of satisfaction to James Gatz of North Dakota, isn’t easy
to say.
James Gatz — that was really, or at least legally, his name.
He had changed it at the age of seventeen and at the specific
moment that witnessed the beginning of his career — when he
saw Dan Cody’s yacht drop anchor over the most insidious flat
on Lake Superior. It was James Gatz who had been loafing
along the beach that afternoon in a torn green jersey and a
pair of canvas pants, but it was already Jay Gatsby who bor-
rowed a rowboat, pulled out to the TUOLOMEE, and informed
Cody that a wind might catch him and break him up in half an
hour.
I suppose he’d had the name ready for a long time, even
then. His parents were shiftless and unsuccessful farm people
— his imagination had never really accepted them as his par-
ents at all. The truth was that Jay Gatsby of West Egg, Long Is-
land, sprang from his Platonic conception of himself. He was a
son of God — a phrase which, if it means anything, means just
that — and he must be about His Father’s business, the service
of a vast, vulgar, and meretricious beauty. So he invented just
the sort of Jay Gatsby that a seventeen-year-old boy would be
likely to invent, and to this conception he was faithful to the
end.
For over a year he had been beating his way along the south
shore of Lake Superior as a clam-digger and a salmon-fisher or
in any other capacity that brought him food and bed. His
brown, hardening body lived naturally through the half-fierce,
half-lazy work of the bracing days. He knew women early, and
since they spoiled him he became contemptuous of them, of
young virgins because they were ignorant, of the others be-
cause they were hysterical about things which in his
overwhelming self-absorbtion he took for granted.
But his heart was in a constant, turbulent riot. The most grot-
esque and fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at night. A
universe of ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in his brain
while the clock ticked on the wash-stand and the moon soaked
with wet light his tangled clothes upon the floor. Each night he
added to the pattern of his fancies until drowsiness closed
down upon some vivid scene with an oblivious embrace. For a
while these reveries provided an outlet for his imagination;
they were a satisfactory hint of the unreality of reality, a prom-
ise that the rock of the world was founded securely on a fairy’s
wing.
An instinct toward his future glory had led him, some months
before, to the small Lutheran college of St. Olaf in southern
Minnesota. He stayed there two weeks, dismayed at its fero-
cious indifference to the drums of his destiny, to destiny itself,
and despising the janitor’s work with which he was to pay his
way through. Then he drifted back to Lake Superior, and he
was still searching for something to do on the day that Dan
Cody’s yacht dropped anchor in the shallows alongshore.
Cody was fifty years old then, a product of the Nevada silver
fields, of the Yukon, of every rush for metal since seventy-five.
The transactions in Montana copper that made him many times
a millionaire found him physically robust but on the verge of
soft-mindedness, and, suspecting this, an infinite number of
women tried to separate him from his money. The none too sa-
vory ramifications by which Ella Kaye, the newspaper woman,
played Madame de Maintenon to his weakness and sent him to
sea in a yacht, were common knowledge to the turgid sub-
journalism of 1902. He had been coasting along all too hospit-
able shores for five years when he turned up as James Gatz’s
destiny at Little Girls Point.
To the young Gatz, resting on his oars and looking up at the
railed deck, the yacht represented all the beauty and glamour
in the world. I suppose he smiled at Cody — he had probably
discovered that people liked him when he smiled. At any rate
Cody asked him a few questions (one of them elicited the brand
new name) and found that he was quick and extravagantly am-
bitious. A few days later he took him to Duluth and bought him
a blue coat, six pair of white duck trousers, and a yachting cap.
And when the TUOLOMEE left for the West Indies and the Bar-
bary Coast Gatsby left too.
He was employed in a vague personal capacity — while he
remained with Cody he was in turn steward, mate, skipper,
secretary, and even jailor, for Dan Cody sober knew what lav-
ish doings Dan Cody drunk might soon be about, and he
provided for such contingencies by reposing more and more
trust in Gatsby. The arrangement lasted five years, during
which the boat went three times around the Continent. It might
have lasted indefinitely except for the fact that Ella Kaye came
on board one night in Boston and a week later Dan Cody inhos-
pitably died.
I remember the portrait of him up in Gatsby’s bedroom, a
gray, florid man with a hard, empty face — the pioneer de-
bauchee, who during one phase of American life brought back
to the Eastern seaboard the savage violence of the frontier
brothel and saloon. It was indirectly due to Cody that Gatsby
drank so little. Sometimes in the course of gay parties women
used to rub champagne into his hair; for himself he formed the
habit of letting liquor alone.
And it was from Cody that he inherited money — a legacy of
twenty-five thousand dollars. He didn’t get it. He never under-
stood the legal device that was used against him, but what re-
mained of the millions went intact to Ella Kaye. He was left
with his singularly appropriate education; the vague contour of
Jay Gatsby had filled out to the substantiality of a man.
He told me all this very much later, but I’ve put it down here
with the idea of exploding those first wild rumors about his
antecedents, which weren’t even faintly true. Moreover he told
it to me at a time of confusion, when I had reached the point of
believing everything and nothing about him. So I take advant-
age of this short halt, while Gatsby, so to speak, caught his
breath, to clear this set of misconceptions away.
It was a halt, too, in my association with his affairs. For sev-
eral weeks I didn’t see him or hear his voice on the phone —
mostly I was in New York, trotting around with Jordan and try-
ing to ingratiate myself with her senile aunt — but finally I
went over to his house one Sunday afternoon. I hadn’t been
there two minutes when somebody brought Tom Buchanan in
for a drink. I was startled, naturally, but the really surprising
thing was that it hadn’t happened before.
They were a party of three on horseback — Tom and a man
named Sloane and a pretty woman in a brown riding-habit,
who had been there previously.
“I’m delighted to see you,” said Gatsby, standing on his
porch. “I’m delighted that you dropped in.”
As though they cared!
“Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar.” He walked
around the room quickly, ringing bells. “I’ll have something to
drink for you in just a minute.”
He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was there.
But he would be uneasy anyhow until he had given them
something, realizing in a vague way that that was all they came
for. Mr. Sloane wanted nothing. A lemonade? No, thanks. A
little champagne? Nothing at all, thanks... . I’m sorry ——
“Did you have a nice ride?”
“Very good roads around here.”
“I suppose the automobiles ——”
“Yeah.”
Moved by an irresistible impulse, Gatsby turned to Tom, who
had accepted the introduction as a stranger.
“I believe we’ve met somewhere before, Mr. Buchanan.”
“Oh, yes,” said Tom, gruffly polite, but obviously not remem-
bering. “So we did. I remember very well.”
“About two weeks ago.”
“That’s right. You were with Nick here.”
“I know your wife,” continued Gatsby, almost aggressively.
“That so?”
Tom turned to me.
“You live near here, Nick?”
“Next door.”
“That so?”
Mr. Sloane didn’t enter into the conversation, but lounged
back haughtily in his chair; the woman said nothing either —
until unexpectedly, after two highballs, she became cordial.
“We’ll all come over to your next party, Mr. Gatsby,” she sug-
gested. “What do you say?”
“Certainly; I’d be delighted to have you.”
“Be ver’ nice,” said Mr. Sloane, without gratitude. “Well —
think ought to be starting home.”
“Please don’t hurry,” Gatsby urged them. He had control of
himself now, and he wanted to see more of Tom. “Why don’t
you — why don’t you stay for supper? I wouldn’t be surprised if
some other people dropped in from New York.”
“You come to supper with ME,” said the lady enthusiastically.
“Both of you.”
This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.
“Come along,” he said — but to her only.
“I mean it,” she insisted. “I’d love to have you. Lots of room.”
Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted to go, and he
didn’t see that Mr. Sloane had determined he shouldn’t.
“I’m afraid I won’t be able to,” I said.
“Well, you come,” she urged, concentrating on Gatsby.
Mr. Sloane murmured something close to her ear.
“We won’t be late if we start now,” she insisted aloud.
“I haven’t got a horse,” said Gatsby. “I used to ride in the
army, but I’ve never bought a horse. I’ll have to follow you in
my car. Excuse me for just a minute.”
The rest of us walked out on the porch, where Sloane and the
lady began an impassioned conversation aside.
“My God, I believe the man’s coming,” said Tom. “Doesn’t he
know she doesn’t want him?”
“She says she does want him.”
“She has a big dinner party and he won’t know a soul there.”
He frowned. “I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy. By
God, I may be old-fashioned in my ideas, but women run
around too much these days to suit me. They meet all kinds of
crazy fish.”
Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down the steps and
mounted their horses.
“Come on,” said Mr. Sloane to Tom, “we’re late. We’ve got to
go.” And then to me: “Tell him we couldn’t wait, will you?”
Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged a cool nod,
and they trotted quickly down the drive, disappearing under
the August foliage just as Gatsby, with hat and light overcoat in
hand, came out the front door.
Tom was evidently perturbed at Daisy’s running around
alone, for on the following Saturday night he came with her to
Gatsby’s party. Perhaps his presence gave the evening its pe-
culiar quality of oppressiveness — it stands out in my memory
from Gatsby’s other parties that summer. There were the same
people, or at least the same sort of people, the same profusion
of champagne, the same many-colored, many-keyed commo-
tion, but I felt an unpleasantness in the air, a pervading harsh-
ness that hadn’t been there before. Or perhaps I had merely
grown used to it, grown to accept West Egg as a world com-
plete in itself, with its own standards and its own great figures,
second to nothing because it had no consciousness of being so,
and now I was looking at it again, through Daisy’s eyes. It is in-
variably saddening to look through new eyes at things upon
which you have expended your own powers of adjustment.
They arrived at twilight, and, as we strolled out among the
sparkling hundreds, Daisy’s voice was playing murmurous
tricks in her throat.
“These things excite me so,” she whispered.
“If you want to kiss me any time during the evening, Nick,
just let me know and I’ll be glad to arrange it for you. Just
mention my name. Or present a green card. I’m giving out
green ——”
“Look around,” suggested Gatsby.
“I’m looking around. I’m having a marvelous ——”
“You must see the faces of many people you’ve heard about.”
Tom’s arrogant eyes roamed the crowd.
“We don’t go around very much,” he said. “In fact, I was just
thinking I don’t know a soul here.”
“Perhaps you know that lady.” Gatsby indicated a gorgeous,
scarcely human orchid of a woman who sat in state under a
white plum tree. Tom and Daisy stared, with that peculiarly un-
real feeling that accompanies the recognition of a hitherto
ghostly celebrity of the movies.
“She’s lovely,” said Daisy.
“The man bending over her is her director.”
He took them ceremoniously from group to group:
“Mrs. Buchanan ... and Mr. Buchanan ——” After an instant’s
hesitation he added: “the polo player.”
“Oh no,” objected Tom quickly, “not me.”
But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby, for Tom re-
mained “the polo player.” for the rest of the evening.
“I’ve never met so many celebrities!” Daisy exclaimed. “I
liked that man — what was his name?— with the sort of blue
nose.”
Gatsby identified him, adding that he was a small producer.
“Well, I liked him anyhow.”
“I’d a little rather not be the polo player,” said Tom pleas-
antly, “I’d rather look at all these famous people in — in
oblivion.”
Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remember being surprised by his
graceful, conservative fox-trot — I had never seen him dance
before. Then they sauntered over to my house and sat on the
steps for half an hour, while at her request I remained watch-
fully in the garden. “In case there’s a fire or a flood,” she ex-
plained, “or any act of God.”
Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were sitting down to
supper together. “Do you mind if I eat with some people over
here?” he said. “A fellow’s getting off some funny stuff.”
“Go ahead,” answered Daisy genially, “and if you want to
take down any addresses here’s my little gold pencil.” ... she
looked around after a moment and told me the girl was “com-
mon but pretty,” and I knew that except for the half-hour she’d
been alone with Gatsby she wasn’t having a good time.
We were at a particularly tipsy table. That was my fault —
Gatsby had been called to the phone, and I’d enjoyed these
same people only two weeks before. But what had amused me
then turned septic on the air now.
“How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?”
The girl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully, to slump
against my shoulder. At this inquiry she sat up and opened her
eyes.
“Wha’?”
A massive and lethargic woman, who had been urging Daisy
to play golf with her at the local club to-morrow, spoke in Miss
Baedeker’s defence:
“Oh, she’s all right now. When she’s had five or six cocktails
she always starts screaming like that. I tell her she ought to
leave it alone.”
“I do leave it alone,” affirmed the accused hollowly.
“We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc Civet here: ‘There’s
somebody that needs your help, Doc.’”
“She’s much obliged, I’m sure,” said another friend, without
gratitude. “But you got her dress all wet when you stuck her
head in the pool.”
“Anything I hate is to get my head stuck in a pool,” mumbled
Miss Baedeker. “They almost drowned me once over in New
Jersey.”
“Then you ought to leave it alone,” countered Doctor Civet.
“Speak for yourself!” cried Miss Baedeker violently. “Your
hand shakes. I wouldn’t let you operate on me!”
It was like that. Almost the last thing I remember was stand-
ing with Daisy and watching the moving-picture director and
his Star. They were still under the white plum tree and their
faces were touching except for a pale, thin ray of moonlight
between. It occurred to me that he had been very slowly bend-
ing toward her all evening to attain this proximity, and even
while I watched I saw him stoop one ultimate degree and kiss
at her cheek.
“I like her,” said Daisy, “I think she’s lovely.”
But the rest offended her — and inarguably, because it
wasn’t a gesture but an emotion. She was appalled by West
Egg, this unprecedented “place.” that Broadway had begotten
upon a Long Island fishing village — appalled by its raw vigor
that chafed under the old euphemisms and by the too obtrusive
fate that herded its inhabitants along a short-cut from nothing
to nothing. She saw something awful in the very simplicity she
failed to understand.
I sat on the front steps with them while they waited for their
car. It was dark here in front; only the bright door sent ten
square feet of light volleying out into the soft black morning.
Sometimes a shadow moved against a dressing-room blind
above, gave way to another shadow, an indefinite procession of
shadows, who rouged and powdered in an invisible glass.
“Who is this Gatsby anyhow?” demanded Tom suddenly.
“Some big bootlegger?”
“Where’d you hear that?” I inquired.
“I didn’t hear it. I imagined it. A lot of these newly rich
people are just big bootleggers, you know.”
“Not Gatsby,” I said shortly.
He was silent for a moment. The pebbles of the drive
crunched under his feet.
“Well, he certainly must have strained himself to get this me-
nagerie together.”
A breeze stirred the gray haze of Daisy’s fur collar.
“At least they’re more interesting than the people we know,”
she said with an effort.
“You didn’t look so interested.”
“Well, I was.”
Tom laughed and turned to me.
“Did you notice Daisy’s face when that girl asked her to put
her under a cold shower?”
Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky, rhythmic
whisper, bringing out a meaning in each word that it had never
had before and would never have again. When the melody rose,
her voice broke up sweetly, following it, in a way contralto
voices have, and each change tipped out a little of her warm
human magic upon the air.
“Lots of people come who haven’t been invited,” she said
suddenly. “That girl hadn’t been invited. They simply force
their way in and he’s too polite to object.”
“I’d like to know who he is and what he does,” insisted Tom.
“And I think I’ll make a point of finding out.”
“I can tell you right now,” she answered. “He owned some
drug-stores, a lot of drug-stores. He built them up himself.”
The dilatory limousine came rolling up the drive.
“Good night, Nick,” said Daisy.
Her glance left me and sought the lighted top of the steps,
where THREE O’CLOCK IN THE MORNING, a neat, sad little
waltz of that year, was drifting out the open door. After all, in
the very casualness of Gatsby’s party there were romantic pos-
sibilities totally absent from her world. What was it up there in
the song that seemed to be calling her back inside? What
would happen now in the dim, incalculable hours? Perhaps
some unbelievable guest would arrive, a person infinitely rare
and to be marvelled at, some authentically radiant young girl
who with one fresh glance at Gatsby, one moment of magical
encounter, would blot out those five years of unwavering
devotion.
I stayed late that night, Gatsby asked me to wait until he was
free, and I lingered in the garden until the inevitable swimming
party had run up, chilled and exalted, from the black beach,
until the lights were extinguished in the guest-rooms overhead.
When he came down the steps at last the tanned skin was
drawn unusually tight on his face, and his eyes were bright and
tired.
“She didn’t like it,” he said immediately.
“Of course she did.”
“She didn’t like it,” he insisted. “She didn’t have a good
time.”
He was silent, and I guessed at his unutterable depression.
“I feel far away from her,” he said. “It’s hard to make her
understand.”
“You mean about the dance?”
“The dance?” He dismissed all the dances he had given with
a snap of his fingers. “Old sport, the dance is unimportant.”
He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that she should go to
Tom and say: “I never loved you.” After she had obliterated
four years with that sentence they could decide upon the more
practical measures to be taken. One of them was that, after she
was free, they were to go back to Louisville and be married
from her house — just as if it were five years ago.
“And she doesn’t understand,” he said. “She used to be able
to understand. We’d sit for hours ——”
He broke off and began to walk up and down a desolate path
of fruit rinds and discarded favors and crushed flowers.
“I wouldn’t ask too much of her,” I ventured. “You can’t re-
peat the past.”
“Can’t repeat the past?” he cried incredulously. “Why of
course you can!”
He looked around him wildly, as if the past were lurking here
in the shadow of his house, just out of reach of his hand.
“I’m going to fix everything just the way it was before,” he
said, nodding determinedly. “She’ll see.”
He talked a lot about the past, and I gathered that he wanted
to recover something, some idea of himself perhaps, that had
gone into loving Daisy. His life had been confused and dis-
ordered since then, but if he could once return to a certain
starting place and go over it all slowly, he could find out what
that thing was... .
... One autumn night, five years before, they had been walk-
ing down the street when the leaves were falling, and they
came to a place where there were no trees and the sidewalk
was white with moonlight. They stopped here and turned to-
ward each other. Now it was a cool night with that mysterious
excitement in it which comes at the two changes of the year.
The quiet lights in the houses were humming out into the dark-
ness and there was a stir and bustle among the stars. Out of
the corner of his eye Gatsby saw that the blocks of the side-
walks really formed a ladder and mounted to a secret place
above the trees — he could climb to it, if he climbed alone, and
once there he could suck on the pap of life, gulp down the in-
comparable milk of wonder.
His heart beat faster and faster as Daisy’s white face came
up to his own. He knew that when he kissed this girl, and
forever wed his unutterable visions to her perishable breath,
his mind would never romp again like the mind of God. So he
waited, listening for a moment longer to the tuning-fork that
had been struck upon a star. Then he kissed her. At his lips’
touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the incarnation
was complete.
Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimental-
ity, I was reminded of something — an elusive rhythm, a frag-
ment of lost words, that I had heard somewhere a long time
ago. For a moment a phrase tried to take shape in my mouth
and my lips parted like a dumb man’s, as though there was
more struggling upon them than a wisp of startled air. But they
made no sound, and what I had almost remembered was un-
communicable forever.

It was when curiosity about Gatsby was ai its highest that
the lights in his house failed to go on one Saturday nigth -
and, as obscurely as it had begun, his career as Trimalchio was
over. Only gradually did I become aware that the automobiles
which turned expectantly into his drive stayed for just a minute
and then drove sulkily away. Wondering if he were sick I went
over to find out — an unfamiliar butler with a villainous face
squinted at me suspiciously from the door.
“Is Mr. Gatsby sick?”
“Nope.” After a pause he added “sir.” in a dilatory, grudging
way.
“I hadn’t seen him around, and I was rather worried. Tell him
Mr. Carraway came over.”
“Who?” he demanded rudely.
“Carraway.”
“Carraway. All right, I’ll tell him.” Abruptly he slammed the
door.
My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed every ser-
vant in his house a week ago and replaced them with half a
dozen others, who never went into West Egg Village to be
bribed by the tradesmen, but ordered moderate supplies over
the telephone. The grocery boy reported that the kitchen
looked like a pigsty, and the general opinion in the village was
that the new people weren’t servants at all.
Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.
“Going away?” I inquired.
“No, old sport.”
“I hear you fired all your servants.”
“I wanted somebody who wouldn’t gossip. Daisy comes over
quite often — in the afternoons.”
So the whole caravansary had fallen in like a card house at
the disapproval in her eyes.
“They’re some people Wolfsheim wanted to do something for.
They’re all brothers and sisters. They used to run a small
hotel.”
“I see.”
He was calling up at Daisy’s request — would I come to lunch
at her house to-morrow? Miss Baker would be there. Half an
hour later Daisy herself telephoned and seemed relieved to
find that I was coming. Something was up. And yet I couldn’t
believe that they would choose this occasion for a scene — es-
pecially for the rather harrowing scene that Gatsby had out-
lined in the garden.
The next day was broiling, almost the last, certainly the
warmest, of the summer. As my train emerged from the tunnel
into sunlight, only the hot whistles of the National Biscuit Com-
pany broke the simmering hush at noon. The straw seats of the
car hovered on the edge of combustion; the woman next to me
perspired delicately for a while into her white shirtwaist, and
then, as her newspaper dampened under her fingers, lapsed
despairingly into deep heat with a desolate cry. Her pocket-
book slapped to the floor.
“Oh, my!” she gasped.
I picked it up with a weary bend and handed it back to her,
holding it at arm’s length and by the extreme tip of the corners
to indicate that I had no designs upon it — but every one near
by, including the woman, suspected me just the same.
“Hot!” said the conductor to familiar faces. “Some weather!
hot! hot! hot! Is it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it ... ?”
My commutation ticket came back to me with a dark stain
from his hand. That any one should care in this heat whose
flushed lips he kissed, whose head made damp the pajama
pocket over his heart!
... Through the hall of the Buchanans’ house blew a faint
wind, carrying the sound of the telephone bell out to Gatsby
and me as we waited at the door.
“The master’s body!” roared the butler into the mouthpiece.
“I’m sorry, madame, but we can’t furnish it — it’s far too hot to
touch this noon!”
What he really said was: “Yes ... yes ... I’ll see.”
He set down the receiver and came toward us, glistening
slightly, to take our stiff straw hats.
“Madame expects you in the salon!” he cried, needlessly in-
dicating the direction. In this heat every extra gesture was an
affront to the common store of life.
The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dark and cool.
Daisy and Jordan lay upon an enormous couch, like silver idols
weighing down their own white dresses against the singing
breeze of the fans.
“We can’t move,” they said together.
Jordan’s fingers, powdered white over their tan, rested for a
moment in mine.
“And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete?” I inquired.
Simultaneously I heard his voice, gruff, muffled, husky, at the
hall telephone.
Gatsby stood in the centre of the crimson carpet and gazed
around with fascinated eyes. Daisy watched him and laughed,
her sweet, exciting laugh; a tiny gust of powder rose from her
bosom into the air.
“The rumor is,” whispered Jordan, “that that’s Tom’s girl on
the telephone.”
We were silent. The voice in the hall rose high with annoy-
ance: “Very well, then, I won’t sell you the car at all... . I’m un-
der no obligations to you at all ... and as for your bothering me
about it at lunch time, I won’t stand that at all!”
“Holding down the receiver,” said Daisy cynically.
“No, he’s not,” I assured her. “It’s a bona-fide deal. I happen
to know about it.”
Tom flung open the door, blocked out its space for a moment
with his thick body, and hurried into the room.
“Mr. Gatsby!” He put out his broad, flat hand with well-con-
cealed dislike. “I’m glad to see you, sir... . Nick... .”
“Make us a cold drink,” cried Daisy.
As he left the room again she got up and went over to Gatsby
and pulled his face down, kissing him on the mouth.
“You know I love you,” she murmured.
“You forget there’s a lady present,” said Jordan.
Daisy looked around doubtfully.
“You kiss Nick too.”
“What a low, vulgar girl!”
“I don’t care!” cried Daisy, and began to clog on the brick
fireplace. Then she remembered the heat and sat down guiltily
on the couch just as a freshly laundered nurse leading a little
girl came into the room.
“Bles-sed pre-cious,” she crooned, holding out her arms.
“Come to your own mother that loves you.”
The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed across the room
and rooted shyly into her mother’s dress.
“The bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your old
yellowy hair? Stand up now, and say — How-de-do.”
Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took the small, reluct-
ant hand. Afterward he kept looking at the child with surprise.
I don’t think he had ever really believed in its existence before.
“I got dressed before luncheon,” said the child, turning
eagerly to Daisy.
“That’s because your mother wanted to show you off.” Her
face bent into the single wrinkle of the small, white neck. “You
dream, you. You absolute little dream.”
“Yes,” admitted the child calmly. “Aunt Jordan’s got on a
white dress too.”
“How do you like mother’s friends?” Daisy turned her around
so that she faced Gatsby. “Do you think they’re pretty?”
“Where’s Daddy?”
“She doesn’t look like her father,” explained Daisy. “She
looks like me. She’s got my hair and shape of the face.”
Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nurse took a step for-
ward and held out her hand.
“Come, Pammy.”
“Good-by, sweetheart!”
With a reluctant backward glance the well-disciplined child
held to her nurse’s hand and was pulled out the door, just as
Tom came back, preceding four gin rickeys that clicked full of
ice.
Gatsby took up his drink.
“They certainly look cool,” he said, with visible tension.
We drank in long, greedy swallows.
“I read somewhere that the sun’s getting hotter every year,”
said Tom genially. “It seems that pretty soon the earth’s going
to fall into the sun — or wait a minute — it’s just the opposite
— the sun’s getting colder every year.
“Come outside,” he suggested to Gatsby, “I’d like you to have
a look at the place.”
I went with them out to the veranda. On the green Sound,
stagnant in the heat, one small sail crawled slowly toward the
fresher sea. Gatsby’s eyes followed it momentarily; he raised
his hand and pointed across the bay.
“I’m right across from you.”
“So you are.”
Our eyes lifted over the rose-beds and the hot lawn and the
weedy refuse of the dog-days along-shore. Slowly the white
wings of the boat moved against the blue cool limit of the sky.
Ahead lay the scalloped ocean and the abounding blessed isles.
“There’s sport for you,” said Tom, nodding. “I’d like to be out
there with him for about an hour.”
We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened too against
the heat, and drank down nervous gayety with the cold ale.
“What’ll we do with ourselves this afternoon?” cried Daisy,
“and the day after that, and the next thirty years?”
“Don’t be morbid,” Jordan said. “Life starts all over again
when it gets crisp in the fall.”
“But it’s so hot,” insisted Daisy, on the verge of tears, “and
everything’s so confused. Let’s all go to town!”
Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating against it,
molding its senselessness into forms.
“I’ve heard of making a garage out of a stable,” Tom was say-
ing to Gatsby, “but I’m the first man who ever made a stable
out of a garage.”
“Who wants to go to town?” demanded Daisy insistently.
Gatsby’s eyes floated toward her. “Ah,” she cried, “you look so
cool.”
Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other, alone
in space. With an effort she glanced down at the table.
“You always look so cool,” she repeated.
She had told him that she loved him, and Tom Buchanan saw.
He was astounded. His mouth opened a little, and he looked at
Gatsby, and then back at Daisy as if he had just recognized her
as some one he knew a long time ago.
“You resemble the advertisement of the man,” she went on
innocently. “You know the advertisement of the man ——”
“All right,” broke in Tom quickly, “I’m perfectly willing to go
to town. Come on — we’re all going to town.”
He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his
wife. No one moved.
“Come on!” His temper cracked a little. “What’s the matter,
anyhow? If we’re going to town, let’s start.”
His hand, trembling with his effort at self-control, bore to his
lips the last of his glass of ale. Daisy’s voice got us to our feet
and out on to the blazing gravel drive.
“Are we just going to go?” she objected. “Like this? Aren’t we
going to let any one smoke a cigarette first?”
“Everybody smoked all through lunch.”
“Oh, let’s have fun,” she begged him. “It’s too hot to fuss.”
He didn’t answer.
“Have it your own way,” she said. “Come on, Jordan.”
They went up-stairs to get ready while we three men stood
there shuffling the hot pebbles with our feet. A silver curve of
the moon hovered already in the western sky. Gatsby started to
speak, changed his mind, but not before Tom wheeled and
faced him expectantly.
“Have you got your stables here?” asked Gatsby with an
effort.
“About a quarter of a mile down the road.”
“Oh.”
A pause.
“I don’t see the idea of going to town,” broke out Tom sav-
agely. “Women get these notions in their heads ——”
“Shall we take anything to drink?” called Daisy from an up-
per window.
“I’ll get some whiskey,” answered Tom. He went inside.
Gatsby turned to me rigidly:
“I can’t say anything in his house, old sport.”
“She’s got an indiscreet voice,” I remarked. “It’s full of ——”
I hesitated.
“Her voice is full of money,” he said suddenly.
That was it. I’d never understood before. It was full of money
— that was the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell in it, the
jingle of it, the cymbals’ song of it... . high in a white palace the
king’s daughter, the golden girl... .
Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart bottle in a tow-
el, followed by Daisy and Jordan wearing small tight hats of
metallic cloth and carrying light capes over their arms.
“Shall we all go in my car?” suggested Gatsby. He felt the
hot, green leather of the seat. “I ought to have left it in the
shade.”
“Is it standard shift?” demanded Tom.
“Yes.”
“Well, you take my coupe and let me drive your car to town.”
The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.
“I don’t think there’s much gas,” he objected.
“Plenty of gas,” said Tom boisterously. He looked at the
gauge. “And if it runs out I can stop at a drug-store. You can
buy anything at a drug-store nowadays.”
A pause followed this apparently pointless remark. Daisy
looked at Tom frowning, and an indefinable expression, at once
definitely unfamiliar and vaguely recognizable, as if I had only
heard it described in words, passed over Gatsby’s face.
“Come on, Daisy,” said Tom, pressing her with his hand to-
ward Gatsby’s car. “I’ll take you in this circus wagon.”
He opened the door, but she moved out from the circle of his
arm.
“You take Nick and Jordan. We’ll follow you in the coupe.”
She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her hand.
Jordan and Tom and I got into the front seat of Gatsby’s car,
Tom pushed the unfamiliar gears tentatively, and we shot off
into the oppressive heat, leaving them out of sight behind.
“Did you see that?” demanded Tom.
“See what?”
He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan and I must
have known all along.
“You think I’m pretty dumb, don’t you?” he suggested. “Per-
haps I am, but I have a — almost a second sight, sometimes,
that tells me what to do. Maybe you don’t believe that, but
science ——”
He paused. The immediate contingency overtook him, pulled
him back from the edge of the theoretical abyss.
“I’ve made a small investigation of this fellow,” he continued.
“I could have gone deeper if I’d known ——”
“Do you mean you’ve been to a medium?” inquired Jordan
humorously.
“What?” Confused, he stared at us as we laughed. “A
medium?”
“About Gatsby.”
“About Gatsby! No, I haven’t. I said I’d been making a small
investigation of his past.”
“And you found he was an Oxford man,” said Jordan
helpfully.
“An Oxford man!” He was incredulous. “Like hell he is! He
wears a pink suit.”
“Nevertheless he’s an Oxford man.”
“Oxford, New Mexico,” snorted Tom contemptuously, “or
something like that.”
“Listen, Tom. If you’re such a snob, why did you invite him to
lunch?” demanded Jordan crossly.
“Daisy invited him; she knew him before we were married —
God knows where!”
We were all irritable now with the fading ale, and aware of it
we drove for a while in silence. Then as Doctor T. J. Eckle-
burg’s faded eyes came into sight down the road, I re-
membered Gatsby’s caution about gasoline.
“We’ve got enough to get us to town,” said Tom.
“But there’s a garage right here,” objected Jordan. “I don’t
want to get stalled in this baking heat.” Tom threw on both
brakes impatiently, and we slid to an abrupt dusty stop under
Wilson’s sign. After a moment the proprietor emerged from the
interior of his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.
“Let’s have some gas!” cried Tom roughly. “What do you
think we stopped for — to admire the view?”
“I’m sick,” said Wilson without moving. “Been sick all day.”
“What’s the matter?”
“I’m all run down.”
“Well, shall I help myself?” Tom demanded. “You sounded
well enough on the phone.”
With an effort Wilson left the shade and support of the door-
way and, breathing hard, unscrewed the cap of the tank. In the
sunlight his face was green.
“I didn’t mean to interrupt your lunch,” he said. “But I need
money pretty bad, and I was wondering what you were going
to do with your old car.”
“How do you like this one?” inquired Tom. “I bought it last
week.“
It’s a nice yellow one,” said Wilson, as he strained at the
handle.
“Like to buy it?”
“Big chance,” Wilson smiled faintly. “No, but I could make
some money on the other.”
“What do you want money for, all of a sudden?”
“I’ve been here too long. I want to get away. My wife and I
want to go West.”
“Your wife does,” exclaimed Tom, startled.
“She’s been talking about it for ten years.” He rested for a
moment against the pump, shading his eyes. “And now she’s
going whether she wants to or not. I’m going to get her away.”
The coupe flashed by us with a flurry of dust and the flash of
a waving hand.
“What do I owe you?” demanded Tom harshly.
“I just got wised up to something funny the last two days,”
remarked Wilson. “That’s why I want to get away. That’s why I
been bothering you about the car.”
“What do I owe you?”
“Dollar twenty.”
The relentless beating heat was beginning to confuse me and
I had a bad moment there before I realized that so far his sus-
picions hadn’t alighted on Tom. He had discovered that Myrtle
had some sort of life apart from him in another world, and the
shock had made him physically sick. I stared at him and then at
Tom, who had made a parallel discovery less than an hour be-
fore — and it occurred to me that there was no difference
between men, in intelligence or race, so profound as the differ-
ence between the sick and the well. Wilson was so sick that he
looked guilty, unforgivably guilty — as if he had just got some
poor girl with child.
“I’ll let you have that car,” said Tom. “I’ll send it over to-mor-
row afternoon.”
That locality was always vaguely disquieting, even in the
broad glare of afternoon, and now I turned my head as though
I had been warned of something behind. Over the ashheaps the
giant eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg kept their vigil, but I per-
ceived, after a moment, that other eyes were regarding us with
peculiar intensity from less than twenty feet away.
In one of the windows over the garage the curtains had been
moved aside a little, and Myrtle Wilson was peering down at
the car. So engrossed was she that she had no consciousness
of being observed, and one emotion after another crept into
her face like objects into a slowly developing picture. Her ex-
pression was curiously familiar — it was an expression I had of-
ten seen on women’s faces, but on Myrtle Wilson’s face it
seemed purposeless and inexplicable until I realized that her
eyes, wide with jealous terror, were fixed not on Tom, but on
Jordan Baker, whom she took to be his wife.
There is no confusion like the confusion of a simple mind,
and as we drove away Tom was feeling the hot whips of panic.
His wife and his mistress, until an hour ago secure and inviol-
ate, were slipping precipitately from his control. Instinct made
him step on the accelerator with the double purpose of over-
taking Daisy and leaving Wilson behind, and we sped along to-
ward Astoria at fifty miles an hour, until, among the spidery
girders of the elevated, we came in sight of the easy-going blue
coupe.
“Those big movies around Fiftieth Street are cool,” sugges-
ted Jordan. “I love New York on summer afternoons when
every one’s away. There’s something very sensuous about it —
overripe, as if all sorts of funny fruits were going to fall into
your hands.”
The word “sensuous” had the effect of further disquieting
Tom, but before he could invent a protest the coupe came to a
stop, and Daisy signaled us to draw up alongside.
“Where are we going?” she cried.
“How about the movies?”
“It’s so hot,” she complained. “You go. We’ll ride around and
meet you after.” With an effort her wit rose faintly, “We’ll meet
you on some corner. I’ll be the man smoking two cigarettes.”
“We can’t argue about it here,” Tom said impatiently, as a
truck gave out a cursing whistle behind us. “You follow me to
the south side of Central Park, in front of the Plaza.”
Several times he turned his head and looked back for their
car, and if the traffic delayed them he slowed up until they
came into sight. I think he was afraid they would dart down a
side street and out of his life forever.
But they didn’t. And we all took the less explicable step of en-
gaging the parlor of a suite in the Plaza Hotel.
The prolonged and tumultuous argument that ended by herd-
ing us into that room eludes me, though I have a sharp physical
memory that, in the course of it, my underwear kept climbing
like a damp snake around my legs and intermittent beads of
sweat raced cool across my back. The notion originated with
Daisy’s suggestion that we hire five bath-rooms and take cold
baths, and then assumed more tangible form as “a place to
have a mint julep.” Each of us said over and over that it was a
“crazy idea.”— we all talked at once to a baffled clerk and
thought, or pretended to think, that we were being very
funny... .
The room was large and stifling, and, though it was already
four o’clock, opening the windows admitted Only a gust of hot
shrubbery from the Park. Daisy went to the mirror and stood
with her back to us, fixing her hair.
“It’s a swell suite,” whispered Jordan respectfully, and every
one laughed.
“Open another window,” commanded Daisy, without turning
around.
“There aren’t any more.”
“Well, we’d better telephone for an axe ——”
“The thing to do is to forget about the heat,” said Tom impa-
tiently. “You make it ten times worse by crabbing about it.”
He unrolled the bottle of whiskey from the towel and put it
on the table.
“Why not let her alone, old sport?” remarked Gatsby. “You’re
the one that wanted to come to town.”
There was a moment of silence. The telephone book slipped
from its nail and splashed to the floor, whereupon Jordan
whispered, “Excuse me.”— but this time no one laughed.
“I’ll pick it up,” I offered.
“I’ve got it.” Gatsby examined the parted string, muttered
“Hum!” in an interested way, and tossed the book on a chair.
“That’s a great expression of yours, isn’t it?” said Tom
sharply.
“What is?”
“All this ‘old sport’ business. Where’d you pick that up?”
“Now see here, Tom,” said Daisy, turning around from the
mirror, “if you’re going to make personal remarks I won’t stay
here a minute. Call up and order some ice for the mint julep.”
As Tom took up the receiver the compressed heat exploded
into sound and we were listening to the portentous chords of
Mendelssohn’s Wedding March from the ballroom below.
“Imagine marrying anybody in this heat!” cried Jordan
dismally.
“Still — I was married in the middle of June,” Daisy re-
membered, “Louisville in June! Somebody fainted. Who was it
fainted, Tom?”
“Biloxi,” he answered shortly.
“A man named Biloxi. ‘blocks’ Biloxi, and he made boxes —
that’s a fact — and he was from Biloxi, Tennessee.”
“They carried him into my house,” appended Jordan, “be-
cause we lived just two doors from the church. And he stayed
three weeks, until Daddy told him he had to get out. The day
after he left Daddy died.” After a moment she added as if she
might have sounded irreverent, “There wasn’t any connection.”
“I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis,” I remarked.
“That was his cousin. I knew his whole family history before
he left. He gave me an aluminum putter that I use to-day.”
The music had died down as the ceremony began and now a
long cheer floated in at the window, followed by intermittent
cries of “Yea-ea-ea!” and finally by a burst of jazz as the dan-
cing began.
“We’re getting old,” said Daisy. “If we were young we’d rise
and dance.”
“Remember Biloxi,” Jordan warned her. “Where’d you know
him, Tom?”
“Biloxi?” He concentrated with an effort. “I didn’t know him.
He was a friend of Daisy’s.”
“He was not,” she denied. “I’d never seen him before. He
came down in the private car.”
“Well, he said he knew you. He said he was raised in Louis-
ville. Asa Bird brought him around at the last minute and asked
if we had room for him.”
Jordan smiled.
“He was probably bumming his way home. He told me he
was president of your class at Yale.”
Tom and I looked at each other blankly.
“Biloxi?”
“First place, we didn’t have any president ——”
Gatsby’s foot beat a short, restless tattoo and Tom eyed him
suddenly.
“By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I understand you’re an Oxford
man.”
“Not exactly.”
“Oh, yes, I understand you went to Oxford.”
“Yes — I went there.”
A pause. Then Tom’s voice, incredulous and insulting: “You
must have gone there about the time Biloxi went to New
Haven.”
Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in with crushed
mint and ice but, the silence was unbroken by his “thank you.”
and the soft closing of the door. This tremendous detail was to
be cleared up at last.
“I told you I went there,” said Gatsby.
“I heard you, but I’d like to know when.”
“It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed five months.
That’s why I can’t really call myself an Oxford man.”
Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his unbelief. But
we were all looking at Gatsby.
“It was an opportunity they gave to some of the officers after
the Armistice,” he continued. “We could go to any of the uni-
versities in England or France.”
I wanted to get up and slap him on the back. I had one of
those renewals of complete faith in him that I’d experienced
before.
Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the table.
“Open the whiskey, Tom,” she ordered, “and I’ll make you a
mint julep. Then you won’t seem so stupid to yourself... . Look
at the mint!”
“Wait a minute,” snapped Tom, “I want to ask Mr. Gatsby
one more question.”
“Go on,” Gatsby said politely.
“What kind of a row are you trying to cause in my house
anyhow?”
They were out in the open at last and Gatsby was content.
“He isn’t causing a row.” Daisy looked desperately from one
to the other. “You’re causing a row. Please have a little self-
control.”
“Self-control!” Repeated Tom incredulously. “I suppose the
latest thing is to sit back and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhere
make love to your wife. Well, if that’s the idea you can count
me out... . Nowadays people begin by sneering at family life
and family institutions, and next they’ll throw everything over-
board and have intermarriage between black and white.”
Flushed with his impassioned gibberish, he saw himself
standing alone on the last barrier of civilization.
“We’re all white here,” murmured Jordan.
“I know I’m not very popular. I don’t give big parties. I sup-
pose you’ve got to make your house into a pigsty in order to
have any friends — in the modern world.”
Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted to laugh
whenever he opened his mouth. The transition from libertine to
prig was so complete.
“I’ve got something to tell YOU, old sport ——” began
Gatsby. But Daisy guessed at his intention.
“Please don’t!” she interrupted helplessly. “Please let’s all go
home. Why don’t we all go home?”
“That’s a good idea.” I got up. “Come on, Tom. Nobody wants
a drink.”
“I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me.”
“Your wife doesn’t love you,” said Gatsby. “She’s never loved
you. She loves me.”
“You must be crazy!” exclaimed Tom automatically.
Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.
“She never loved you, do you hear?” he cried. “She only mar-
ried you because I was poor and she was tired of waiting for
me. It was a terrible mistake, but in her heart she never loved
any one except me!”
At this point Jordan and I tried to go, but Tom and Gatsby in-
sisted with competitive firmness that we remain — as though
neither of them had anything to conceal and it would be a priv-
ilege to partake vicariously of their emotions.
“Sit down, Daisy,” Tom’s voice groped unsuccessfully for the
paternal note. “What’s been going on? I want to hear all about
it.”
“I told you what’s been going on,” said Gatsby. “Going on for
five years — and you didn’t know.”
Tom turned to Daisy sharply.
“You’ve been seeing this fellow for five years?”
“Not seeing,” said Gatsby. “No, we couldn’t meet. But both of
us loved each other all that time, old sport, and you didn’t
know. I used to laugh sometimes.”— but there was no laughter
in his eyes ——” to think that you didn’t know.”
“Oh — that’s all.” Tom tapped his thick fingers together like
a clergyman and leaned back in his chair.
“You’re crazy!” he exploded. “I can’t speak about what
happened five years ago, because I didn’t know Daisy then —
and I’ll be damned if I see how you got within a mile of her un-
less you brought the groceries to the back door. But all the rest
of that’s a God damned lie. Daisy loved me when she married
me and she loves me now.”
“No,” said Gatsby, shaking his head.
“She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes she gets
foolish ideas in her head and doesn’t know what she’s doing.”
He nodded sagely. “And what’s more, I love Daisy too. Once in
a while I go off on a spree and make a fool of myself, but I al-
ways come back, and in my heart I love her all the time.”
“You’re revolting,” said Daisy. She turned to me, and her
voice, dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrilling
scorn: “Do you know why we left Chicago? I’m surprised that
they didn’t treat you to the story of that little spree.”
Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.
“Daisy, that’s all over now,” he said earnestly. “It doesn’t
matter any more. Just tell him the truth — that you never loved
him — and it’s all wiped out forever.”
She looked at him blindly. “Why — how could I love him —
possibly?”
“You never loved him.”
She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort of
appeal, as though she realized at last what she was doing —
and as though she had never, all along, intended doing any-
thing at all. But it was done now. It was too late.
“I never loved him,” she said, with perceptible reluctance.
“Not at Kapiolani?” demanded Tom suddenly.
“No.”
From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating chords
were drifting up on hot waves of air.
“Not that day I carried you down from the Punch Bowl to
keep your shoes dry?” There was a husky tenderness in his
tone... . “Daisy?”
“Please don’t.” Her voice was cold, but the rancor was gone
from it. She looked at Gatsby. “There, Jay,” she said — but her
hand as she tried to light a cigarette was trembling. Suddenly
she threw the cigarette and the burning match on the carpet.
“Oh, you want too much!” she cried to Gatsby. “I love you
now — isn’t that enough? I can’t help what’s past.” She began
to sob helplessly. “I did love him once — but I loved you too.”
Gatsby’s eyes opened and closed.
“You loved me TOO?” he repeated.
“Even that’s a lie,” said Tom savagely. “She didn’t know you
were alive. Why — there’re things between Daisy and me that
you’ll never know, things that neither of us can ever forget.”
The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.
“I want to speak to Daisy alone,” he insisted. “She’s all ex-
cited now ——”
“Even alone I can’t say I never loved Tom,” she admitted in a
pitiful voice. “It wouldn’t be true.”
“Of course it wouldn’t,” agreed Tom.
She turned to her husband.
“As if it mattered to you,” she said.
“Of course it matters. I’m going to take better care of you
from now on.”
“You don’t understand,” said Gatsby, with a touch of panic.
“You’re not going to take care of her any more.”
“I’m not?” Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed. He could
afford to control himself now. “Why’s that?”
“Daisy’s leaving you.”
“Nonsense.”
“I am, though,” she said with a visible effort.
“She’s not leaving me!” Tom’s words suddenly leaned down
over Gatsby. “Certainly not for a common swindler who’d have
to steal the ring he put on her finger.”
“I won’t stand this!” cried Daisy. “Oh, please let’s get out.”
“Who are you, anyhow?” broke out Tom. “You’re one of that
bunch that hangs around with Meyer Wolfsheim — that much I
happen to know. I’ve made a little investigation into your af-
fairs — and I’ll carry it further to-morrow.”
“You can suit yourself about that, old sport.” said Gatsby
steadily.
“I found out what your ‘drug-stores’ were.” He turned to us
and spoke rapidly. “He and this Wolfsheim bought up a lot of
side-street drug-stores here and in Chicago and sold grain al-
cohol over the counter. That’s one of his little stunts. I picked
him for a bootlegger the first time I saw him, and I wasn’t far
wrong.”
“What about it?” said Gatsby politely. “I guess your friend
Walter Chase wasn’t too proud to come in on it.”
“And you left him in the lurch, didn’t you? You let him go to
jail for a month over in New Jersey. God! You ought to hear
Walter on the subject of YOU.”
“He came to us dead broke. He was very glad to pick up
some money, old sport.”
“Don’t you call me ‘old sport’!” cried Tom. Gatsby said noth-
ing. “Walter could have you up on the betting laws too, but
Wolfsheim scared him into shutting his mouth.”
That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was back again in
Gatsby’s face.
“That drug-store business was just small change,” continued
Tom slowly, “but you’ve got something on now that Walter’s
afraid to tell me about.”
I glanced at Daisy, who was staring terrified between Gatsby
and her husband, and at Jordan, who had begun to balance an
invisible but absorbing object on the tip of her chin. Then I
turned back to Gatsby — and was startled at his expression. He
looked — and this is said in all contempt for the babbled
slander of his garden — as if he had “killed a man.” For a mo-
ment the set of his face could be described in just that fantastic
way.
It passed, and he began to talk excitedly to Daisy, denying
everything, defending his name against accusations that had
not been made. But with every word she was drawing further
and further into herself, so he gave that up, and only the dead
dream fought on as the afternoon slipped away, trying to touch
what was no longer tangible, struggling unhappily, undespair-
ingly, toward that lost voice across the room.
The voice begged again to go.
“PLEASE, Tom! I can’t stand this any more.”
Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions, whatever
courage, she had had, were definitely gone.
“You two start on home, Daisy,” said Tom. “In Mr. Gatsby’s
car.”
She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted with mag-
nanimous scorn.
“Go on. He won’t annoy you. I think he realizes that his pre-
sumptuous little flirtation is over.”
They were gone, without a word, snapped out, made acci-
dental, isolated, like ghosts, even from our pity.
After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping the un-
opened bottle of whiskey in the towel.
“Want any of this stuff? Jordan? ... Nick?”
I didn’t answer.
“Nick?” He asked again.
“What?”
“Want any?”
“No ... I just remembered that to-day’s my birthday.”
I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous, menacing
road of a new decade.
It was seven o’clock when we got into the coupe with him
and started for Long Island. Tom talked incessantly, exulting
and laughing, but his voice was as remote from Jordan and me
as the foreign clamor on the sidewalk or the tumult of the elev-
ated overhead. Human sympathy has its limits, and we were
content to let all their tragic arguments fade with the city
lights behind. Thirty — the promise of a decade of loneliness, a
thinning list of single men to know, a thinning brief-case of en-
thusiasm, thinning hair. But there was Jordan beside me, who,
unlike Daisy, was too wise ever to carry well-forgotten dreams
from age to age. As we passed over the dark bridge her wan
face fell lazily against my coat’s shoulder and the formidable
stroke of thirty died away with the reassuring pressure of her
hand.
So we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight.
The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee joint beside
the ashheaps was the principal witness at the inquest. He had
slept through the heat until after five, when he strolled over to
the garage, and found George Wilson sick in his office — really
sick, pale as his own pale hair and shaking all over. Michaelis
advised him to go to bed, but Wilson refused, saying that he’d
miss a lot of business if he did. While his neighbor was trying
to persuade him a violent racket broke out overhead.
“I’ve got my wife locked in up there,” explained Wilson
calmly. “She’s going to stay there till the day after to-morrow,
and then we’re going to move away.”
Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbors for four
years, and Wilson had never seemed faintly capable of such a
statement. Generally he was one of these worn-out men: when
he wasn’t working, he sat on a chair in the doorway and stared
at the people and the cars that passed along the road. When
any one spoke to him he invariably laughed in an agreeable,
colorless way. He was his wife’s man and not his own.
So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what had happened,
but Wilson wouldn’t say a word — instead he began to throw
curious, suspicious glances at his visitor and ask him what he’d
been doing at certain times on certain days. Just as the latter
was getting uneasy, some workmen came past the door bound
for his restaurant, and Michaelis took the opportunity to get
away, intending to come back later. But he didn’t. He supposed
he forgot to, that’s all. When he came outside again, a little
after seven, he was reminded of the conversation because he
heard Mrs. Wilson’s voice, loud and scolding, down-stairs in
the garage.
“Beat me!” he heard her cry. “Throw me down and beat me,
you dirty little coward!”
A moment later she rushed out into the dusk, waving her
hands and shouting — before he could move from his door the
business was over.
The “death car.” as the newspapers called it, didn’t stop; it
came out of the gathering darkness, wavered tragically for a
moment, and then disappeared around the next bend. Michael-
is wasn’t even sure of its color — he told the first policeman
that it was light green. The other car, the one going toward
New York, came to rest a hundred yards beyond, and its driver
hurried back to where Myrtle Wilson, her life violently extin-
guished, knelt in the road and mingled her thick dark blood
with the dust.
Michaelis and this man reached her first, but when they had
torn open her shirtwaist, still damp with perspiration, they saw
that her left breast was swinging loose like a flap, and there
was no need to listen for the heart beneath. The mouth was
wide open and ripped at the corners, as though she had choked
a little in giving up the tremendous vitality she had stored so
long.
We saw the three or four automobiles and the crowd when
we were still some distance away.
“Wreck!” said Tom. “That’s good. Wilson’ll have a little busi-
ness at last.”
He slowed down, but still without any intention of stopping,
until, as we came nearer, the hushed, intent faces of the people
at the garage door made him automatically put on the brakes.
“We’ll take a look,” he said doubtfully, “just a look.”
I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound which issued
incessantly from the garage, a sound which as we got out of
the coupe and walked toward the door resolved itself into the
words “Oh, my God!” uttered over and over in a gasping moan.
“There’s some bad trouble here,” said Tom excitedly.
He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a circle of heads
into the garage, which was lit only by a yellow light in a
swinging wire basket overhead. Then he made a harsh sound
in his throat, and with a violent thrusting movement of his
powerful arms pushed his way through.
The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expos-
tulation; it was a minute before I could see anything at all.
Then new arrivals deranged the line, and Jordan and I were
pushed suddenly inside.
Myrtle Wilson’s body, wrapped in a blanket, and then in an-
other blanket, as though she suffered from a chill in the hot
night, lay on a work-table by the wall, and Tom, with his back
to us, was bending over it, motionless. Next to him stood a mo-
torcycle policeman taking down names with much sweat and
correction in a little book. At first I couldn’t find the source of
the high, groaning words that echoed clamorously through the
bare garage — then I saw Wilson standing on the raised
threshold of his office, swaying back and forth and holding to
the doorposts with both hands. Some man was talking to him in
a low voice and attempting, from time to time, to lay a hand on
his shoulder, but Wilson neither heard nor saw. His eyes would
drop slowly from the swinging light to the laden table by the
wall, and then jerk back to the light again, and he gave out in-
cessantly his high, horrible call:
“Oh, my Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od! oh, Ga-od! oh, my Ga-od!”
Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk and, after staring
around the garage with glazed eyes, addressed a mumbled in-
coherent remark to the policeman.
“M-a-y-.” the policeman was saying, “-o ——”
“No, r-.” corrected the man, “M-a-v-r-o ——”
“Listen to me!” muttered Tom fiercely.
“r” said the policeman, “o ——”
“g ——”
“g ——” He looked up as Tom’s broad hand fell sharply on his
shoulder. “What you want, fella?”
“What happened?— that’s what I want to know.”
“Auto hit her. Ins’antly killed.”
“Instantly killed,” repeated Tom, staring.
“She ran out ina road. Son-of-a-bitch didn’t even stopus car.”
“There was two cars,” said Michaelis, “one comin’, one goin’,
see?”
“Going where?” asked the policeman keenly.
“One goin’ each way. Well, she.”— his hand rose toward the
blankets but stopped half way and fell to his side ——” she ran
out there an’ the one comin’ from N’york knock right into her,
goin’ thirty or forty miles an hour.”
“What’s the name of this place here?” demanded the officer.
“Hasn’t got any name.”
A pale well-dressed negro stepped near.
“It was a yellow car,” he said, “big yellow car. New.”
“See the accident?” asked the policeman.
“No, but the car passed me down the road, going faster’n
forty. Going fifty, sixty.”
“Come here and let’s have your name. Look out now. I want
to get his name.”
Some words of this conversation must have reached Wilson,
swaying in the office door, for suddenly a new theme found
voice among his gasping cries:
“You don’t have to tell me what kind of car it was! I know
what kind of car it was!”
Watching Tom, I saw the wad of muscle back of his shoulder
tighten under his coat. He walked quickly over to Wilson and,
standing in front of him, seized him firmly by the upper arms.
“You’ve got to pull yourself together,” he said with soothing
gruffness.
Wilson’s eyes fell upon Tom; he started up on his tiptoes and
then would have collapsed to his knees had not Tom held him
upright.
“Listen,” said Tom, shaking him a little. “I just got here a
minute ago, from New York. I was bringing you that coupe
we’ve been talking about. That yellow car I was driving this af-
ternoon wasn’t mine — do you hear? I haven’t seen it all
afternoon.”
Only the negro and I were near enough to hear what he said,
but the policeman caught something in the tone and looked
over with truculent eyes.
“What’s all that?” he demanded.
“I’m a friend of his.” Tom turned his head but kept his hands
firm on Wilson’s body. “He says he knows the car that did it ...
it was a yellow car.”
Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look suspiciously
at Tom.
“And what color’s your car?”
“It’s a blue car, a coupe.”
“We’ve come straight from New York,” I said.
Some one who had been driving a little behind us confirmed
this, and the policeman turned away.
“Now, if you’ll let me have that name again correct ——”
Picking up Wilson like a doll, Tom carried him into the office,
set him down in a chair, and came back.
“If somebody’ll come here and sit with him,” he snapped au-
thoritatively. He watched while the two men standing closest
glanced at each other and went unwillingly into the room. Then
Tom shut the door on them and came down the single step, his
eyes avoiding the table. As he passed close to me he
whispered: “Let’s get out.”
Self-consciously, with his authoritative arms breaking the
way, we pushed through the still gathering crowd, passing a
hurried doctor, case in hand, who had been sent for in wild
hope half an hour ago.
Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the bend — then his
foot came down hard, and the coupe raced along through the
night. In a little while I heard a low husky sob, and saw that
the tears were overflowing down his face.
“The God damned coward!” he whimpered. “He didn’t even
stop his car.”
The Buchanans’ house floated suddenly toward us through
the dark rustling trees. Tom stopped beside the porch and
looked up at the second floor, where two windows bloomed
with light among the vines.
“Daisy’s home,” he said. As we got out of the car he glanced
at me and frowned slightly.
“I ought to have dropped you in West Egg, Nick. There’s
nothing we can do to-night.”
A change had come over him, and he spoke gravely, and with
decision. As we walked across the moonlight gravel to the
porch he disposed of the situation in a few brisk phrases.
“I’ll telephone for a taxi to take you home, and while you’re
waiting you and Jordan better go in the kitchen and have them
get you some supper — if you want any.” He opened the door.
“Come in.”
“No, thanks. But I’d be glad if you’d order me the taxi. I’ll
wait outside.”
Jordan put her hand on my arm.
“Won’t you come in, Nick?”
“No, thanks.”
I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to be alone. But Jordan
lingered for a moment more.
“It’s only half-past nine,” she said.
I’d be damned if I’d go in; I’d had enough of all of them for
one day, and suddenly that included Jordan too. She must have
seen something of this in my expression, for she turned ab-
ruptly away and ran up the porch steps into the house. I sat
down for a few minutes with my head in my hands, until I
heard the phone taken up inside and the butler’s voice calling
a taxi. Then I walked slowly down the drive away from the
house, intending to wait by the gate.
I hadn’t gone twenty yards when I heard my name and
Gatsby stepped from between two bushes into the path. I must
have felt pretty weird by that time, because I could think of
nothing except the luminosity of his pink suit under the moon.
“What are you doing?” I inquired.
“Just standing here, old sport.”
Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation. For all I
knew he was going to rob the house in a moment; I wouldn’t
have been surprised to see sinister faces, the faces of ‘Wolf-
sheim’s people,’ behind him in the dark shrubbery.
“Did you see any trouble on the road?” he asked after a
minute.
“Yes.”
He hesitated.
“Was she killed?”
“Yes.”
“I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so. It’s better that the
shock should all come at once. She stood it pretty well.”
He spoke as if Daisy’s reaction was the only thing that
mattered.
“I got to West Egg by a side road,” he went on, “and left the
car in my garage. I don’t think anybody saw us, but of course I
can’t be sure.”
I disliked him so much by this time that I didn’t find it neces-
sary to tell him he was wrong.
“Who was the woman?” he inquired.
“Her name was Wilson. Her husband owns the garage. How
the devil did it happen?”
“Well, I tried to swing the wheel ——” He broke off, and sud-
denly I guessed at the truth.
“Was Daisy driving?”
“Yes,” he said after a moment, “but of course I’ll say I was.
You see, when we left New York she was very nervous and she
thought it would steady her to drive — and this woman rushed
out at us just as we were passing a car coming the other way.
It all happened in a minute, but it seemed to me that she
wanted to speak to us, thought we were somebody she knew.
Well, first Daisy turned away from the woman toward the other
car, and then she lost her nerve and turned back. The second
my hand reached the wheel I felt the shock — it must have
killed her instantly.”
“It ripped her open ——”
“Don’t tell me, old sport.” He winced. “Anyhow — Daisy
stepped on it. I tried to make her stop, but she couldn’t, so I
pulled on the emergency brake. Then she fell over into my lap
and I drove on.
“She’ll be all right to-morrow,” he said presently. “I’m just
going to wait here and see if he tries to bother her about that
unpleasantness this afternoon. She’s locked herself into her
room, and if he tries any brutality she’s going to turn the light
out and on again.”
“He won’t touch her,’ I said. “He’s not thinking about her.”
“I don’t trust him, old sport.”
“How long are you going to wait?”
“All night, if necessary. Anyhow, till they all go to bed.”
A new point of view occurred to me. Suppose Tom found out
that Daisy had been driving. He might think he saw a connec-
tion in it — he might think anything. I looked at the house;
there were two or three bright windows down-stairs and the
pink glow from Daisy’s room on the second floor.
“You wait here,” I said. “I’ll see if there’s any sign of a
commotion.”
I walked back along the border of the lawn, traversed the
gravel softly, and tiptoed up the veranda steps. The drawing-
room curtains were open, and I saw that the room was empty.
Crossing the porch where we had dined that June night three
months before, I came to a small rectangle of light which I
guessed was the pantry window. The blind was drawn, but I
found a rift at the sill.
Daisy and Tom were sitting opposite each other at the kit-
chen table, with a plate of cold fried chicken between them,
and two bottles of ale. He was talking intently across the table
at her, and in his earnestness his hand had fallen upon and
covered her own. Once in a while she looked up at him and
nodded in agreement.
They weren’t happy, and neither of them had touched the
chicken or the ale — and yet they weren’t unhappy either.
There was an unmistakable air of natural intimacy about the
picture, and anybody would have said that they were conspir-
ing together.
As I tiptoed from the porch I heard my taxi feeling its way
along the dark road toward the house. Gatsby was waiting
where I had left him in the drive.
“Is it all quiet up there?” he asked anxiously.
“Yes, it’s all quiet.” I hesitated. “You’d better come home and
get some sleep.”
He shook his head.
“I want to wait here till Daisy goes to bed. Good night, old
sport.”
He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned back eagerly
to his scrutiny of the house, as though my presence marred the
sacredness of the vigil. So I walked away and left him standing
there in the moonlight — watching over nothing.


