The land of the Sleeping Beauty Cave is waking up to tourism
Formerly war-torn Kosovo has many natural wonders, including some of Europe’s most stunning underground worlds.

One autumn morning near the village of Radavc in the Rugova Valley of Kosovo, I took a walking path from my hotel along the White Drin River, a brisk and chilly habitat for trout that flows from the Rusolia peak of the Accursed Mountains nearly a hundred miles southward into Albania.
The river’s waterfall, Kosovo’s largest, is a wondrous spectacle of episodic cascades. Eventually, I continued along the trail for another half-mile, past the season’s final white blooming vestiges of edelweiss, until I arrived at the gated entrance of a cave.
A young woman in her twenties sat in a nearby booth. Her name was Melisa Bojku, and after accepting two Euros, she handed me a hard hat, walked with her keychain to the gate and together we squeezed our way through the cave’s narrow mouth. It was cold and humid inside. A few bats flew above our heads. A musty but not overpowering scent of guano hung in the air. The cave’s floor was slick but not difficult to navigate, and its brawny limestone corridors were discreetly illuminated with green, yellow, and red lights. It was at the same time austere and baroque, like entering a magnificent cathedral of a primordial deity.
Bojku said that the hydrologically chiselled cave was at least two million years old and that the damp stalagmite knobs beside our feet were mere babies, probably about 500 years of age, compared to the glistening stalactites overhead. She pointed out the red iron oxide streaks describing the ancient collision between limestone and volcanic rock. Descending steadily, we eventually could see the dark contour of a subterranean canal. Further beneath us, there dwelled a large if invisible population of crickets that subsisted on insects from the bat guano.
We couldn’t visit an additional room, Bojku apologised, because it contained Neolithic human remains from six thousand years ago that were now being examined by archaeologists. A bullet from World War I had also been found there, as well as a man’s pipe from that era. There may also be evidence of World War II soldiers there, according to stories locals had told her. Who knows what else might turn up during the digging?
There may be a thousand bats in the cave, representing eight different species. “During the day, they’re chilling out,” Bojku said. With a shy smile, she added, “I like to come in here after I get off work, around four or five in the afternoon, just to stand and listen to them flying around and going crazy. My friends think I’m a little bit strange.”
Cave nerds
The Sleeping Beauty Cave, as the ancient Radavc geological phenomenon is now known, was first discovered in 1968 by Serbian archaeologists. But it would not appear on any Kosovo map, much less be a touristic destination that attracts up to 23,000 adult visitors a year, were it not for the efforts of Fatos Katallozi, the 57-year-old outdoorsman who took a perfectly normal schoolgirl in Bojku and trained her to become a cave nerd.
Katalozzi is almost singlehandedly responsible for establishing Kosovo as a major cave-exploration site in Europe. His story is very much in keeping with that of other Kosovars who have shown remarkable determination in rebuilding their war-torn country over the past two decades.
Though the renowned caves of the world include a few made entirely of ice (such as the giant Eisriesenwelt in Werfen, Austria), and others of volcanic lava (like the Cueva de los Verdes in the Canary Islands), the vast majority of them are produced from porous limestone.
The Balkans region, with 70 percent of its earth composed of limestone, is therefore over-abundant with caves. The most famous of these is also Europe’s largest: the 15-mile-long Postojna cave in Slovenia, which was discovered 200 years ago and has attracted a staggering 38 million visitors during that time. Romania’s caves include some that are deeper than Postojna, while a great deal of recent exploration has been devoted to the caves in Albania and Bulgaria.
Though Kosovo is considerably smaller than Wales, it is a nature lover’s small paradise of muscular mountains and glittering waterways. The world has been slow to take note of this. So, frankly, has Kosovo’s government. As the newest country in the Balkans, not to mention the poorest and one that has yet to receive official recognition by its neighbour Serbia, war-scarred Kosovo has not had an easy time selling itself as a vacation spot. The country lacks a Ministry of Tourism. It has only two national parks that are almost completely unstaffed. Kosovo’s underdeveloped tourist industry has therefore relied heavily on the initiative of local protagonists like Katallozi.
I met Katallozi at his business, Outdoor Kosovo, which is situated in the ancient gold and silver trading city of Peja. The city was mostly razed by Serbian troops during the war in 1999 and has subsequently been rebuilt. The exterior of Katallozi’s office still bears scorch marks from the war.
Lanky and with hawkish facial features, Katallozi led me to his jeep, which was loaded down with spelunking gear. We drove northwest, out of the city traffic and another 20 minutes into the Rugova Valley, plunging into a forested range that was electric with autumn foliage and waterfalls seeping out of seemingly every mountain façade.
“As a kid mountaineer, I was always curious about caves,” Katallozi told me as we drove. “But you can’t go wandering into one alone without special lights.” He recalled being on a weekend family picnic in Radavc at a place known for its butterflies, foxes, edelweiss, and of course, its magnificent waterfall.
While there, the villagers who sold local honey and walnuts steered the Katallozi family to the cave. He still remembers the blast of cold air gusting out from the narrow entrance. They did not go inside, but the boy vowed one day to do so.
Years passed, during which Katallozi served in the Yugoslav army and then attended college in Kosovo, until the Serbian officials shut it down for teaching in the Albanian language, which was forbidden under the Milosevic regime. Katallozi moved to London during the war, where he worked as a maintenance engineer for the national railway. He returned in 2002 to see Peja still in ruins. There was no place for Kosovo to go except up. Instead, Katallozi went down.
In 2005, he and a few friends formed a speleological club in Kosovo. He made it a point to investigate caves in every European country he visited, from Greece to Luxembourg. While doing so, Katallozi recalled the cave from his youth and the alluring waterfall beside it. He returned to it, crawled inside for the first time, held up a lamp and was astonished by what he saw.
The local municipality of Peja agreed to let Katallozi repurpose its local cave as a tourist site. He drew up a proposal for erecting metal bridges, light fixtures, and a concession stand. In October of 2016, a Swiss agency that invests in Kosovo agricultural and tourism programs gave him a small grant, with the stipulation that he hire at least three local employees, at least one of them a woman. Katallozi hired seven, including Melisa. He opened the cave for visitors the following April with its new moniker—“because what would you rather visit, the Radavc Cave or the Sleeping Beauty Cave?” he laughed.
Hidden worlds
Katallozi maintains that every cave is as different as every human body, each possessing its own quirks of history, morphology, climate, and dimension. In the Rugova Valley, we descended into the country’s largest underground complex: the Great Canyon Cave, an imposing city-state of limestone spires and undulating galleries, eight miles in length and with ceilings exceeding a thousand feet, bottoming out with four subterranean lakes that have yet to be fully mapped.
Exploring it requires half a day, along with the requisite intestinal fortitude. Katallozi and his club are the cave’s literal gatekeepers, in sole possession of the entryway key. “It’s like a maze and without a guide you’ll get lost,” he said, not needing to elaborate further.
More easily navigated are the four caves near the village of Kusar, accessible from a forest trail. Shrouded beneath dense foliage, the four Kusari caves are less remarkable for their geological features than for the dark streaks from fire along the walls, plain evidence that humans once lived inside them. Katallozi has uncovered a number of ancient mammal bones, suggestive of family banquets. The locals—including the shepherds who first told Katallozi about the Kusari caves’ existence—continue to speak of them as sacred.
With the help of Kusar’s mayor, Katallozi raised the funds to build staircases and hand-rails throughout the cave network. For that matter, Katallozi is also responsible for opening the Great Canyon Cave to visitors, after first spending years with teams from Slovakia and Italy mapping its depths.
As with the Sleeping Beauty Cave, they are forthrightly natural showcases—a marked contrast to the government-run Marble Cave not far from the capital city of Pristina, with its glass doorway and restaurant and daily riot of schoolchildren. The future of any country, including Kosovo, depends in part on how it tends to its past.
Today, the Peja outdoorsman continues to scour the mountains of western Kosovo, his eyes on the alert for signs of water having extruded its way through the limestone, carrying with it calcium carbonate and other minerals and forming cracks that widen into a dark demimonde of hidden life. “They’re everywhere up there,” Fatos Katallozi said as we drove within view of Pashtrik Mountain along the Albanian border. His voice was wistful. “I’d love to explore there. But it’s not safe.”
The month-long 1999 battle of Pastrik, Katallozi explained, was where the Kosovo Liberation Army aided by NATO airstrikes finally broke the backs of the Serbian army, forcing them to surrender. The mountain remains littered with NATO bombs. For now, at least, Kosovo’s recent history kept its ancient history just out of reach.


Greece’s river to the ‘underworld’ now lures adventure travellers
Acheron, the mythical waterway to Hades, is popular for birdwatching, river trekking, and zip lining. Is it sustainable?

Back in the days of gods and monsters, the Titans fought the Olympians for control of the universe. During this 10-year Titanomachy, the Titans gained strength by drinking from the Acheron River. Angered by the move, Zeus cursed the river, turning it black and bitter—a fitting fate for one of the five rivers in Greek mythology said to lead into the underworld.
At least, that’s how one version of the river’s origin story goes. In real life, the Acheron is far from its ancient mythological reputation as “the river of woe.” The 32-mile-long waterway in Epirus, a region in northwest Greece, teems with life, enchanting day-trippers with its biodiverse ecosystem of majestic gorges, ponds, and waterfalls. In riverside villages, nature lovers spot rare wildlife, learn about the area’s history, and yes, float down the storied river.
But a recent uptick in pandemic crowds is incurring the wrath of residents and government officials in tourist towns such as Ammoudiá and Glykí. Misbehaving visitors are leaving trash, damaging flora, and disturbing bird nesting areas. Now, with the spring tourism season on the horizon, officials are looking for ways to balance increased visitation with sustainability. At risk are the area’s endangered animals and natural spaces, which locals are determined to preserve for future generations.
Myths, history, and beyond
The Acheron springs from the Tomaros mountains in the Ioannina prefecture and flows west to the fishing village of Ammoudiá, where it fans out to a delta before emptying into the Ionian Sea. Many villages along the way offer access to the river, but most travellers set their itineraries to Ammoudiá, Mesopótamos, and Glykí.Of the three, Mesopótamos is most closely tied to the river’s mythology. Located just three miles east of Ammoudiá, the hamlet is home to what used to be Acherusian Lake, long believed to be an entrance to Hades. From 1958 to 1977, University of Ioannina archaeology professor Sotirios Dakaris excavated the northwest shores of the lake and uncovered ruins dating to the Hellenistic-period (late fourth to late third centuries B.C.). The ruins were identified as the Necromanteion, or the Oracle of the Dead.
Millennia ago, the Necromanteion (also Nekromanteion) featured in Homer’s tale of Odysseus sailing into Hades, where he briefly reunited with the souls of many, including his mother, on the banks of the Acheron. Like Homer’s hero, ancient Greek pilgrims made the arduous trip to the oracle to communicate directly with the dearly departed.
“The world of the dead was considered quite dangerous,” says Anthi Aggeli, director of the Ephorate of Antiquities of Preveza, an expert on the site’s history. “Therefore, pilgrims had to be clean in body and soul. They had to follow a specific cleansing ceremony.”
Pilgrims typically stayed at the Necromanteion “for a lunar month,” says Spyros Raptis, president of the Friends of Nekromanteion and Acheron and a tour guide at the site for 35 years. They ate specific foods—including hallucinogenic plants—and performed rituals in the darkness. During their stay, the believers claimed to see shadows of deceased loved ones.
Experts debate whether the site is the fabled Necromanteion or an ancient farmhouse, yet it continues to fascinate, especially after sound tests conducted from 1997 to 2008 by Aristotle University of Thessaloniki researchers concluded that the subterranean chamber is indeed “dead silent.” Even if it isn’t the ancient Necromanteion, “it certainly is an early anechoic chamber built 2,700 years ago,” claims Panagiotis Karampatzakis, one of the researchers.
Today’s travellers can combine a stop at the ruins with a visit to Ammoudiá, where boat tours explore the wetlands along the river with its waterlilies, emerald damselflies, and trees decorated with fuzzy penduline tit nests. It’s mesmerising, says tour guide Giorgos Bitzios, a modern-day ferryman in Ammoudiá.
About 12 miles upriver from Ammoudiá, Glykí is known for heart-pumping adventures like canyoneering and river trekking, a popular activity in Asia that combines swimming and climbing boulders, to a gorge commonly called the Straits.
Others take to the sky on zip lines at places such as Zipline Greece, and slide 350 yards at speeds up to 30 miles per hour over the turquoise waters. But it’s not all adventure. “Acheron is a mild river [in summer],” says Vivi Markou, who started her tour business, Riverdream, with two rafting boats and two horses. “Rafting here [in Glykí] accommodates all levels of experience. It’s ideal both for families and older people.”
Nature—and challenges
Besides the myriad of outdoor activities, Acheron supports unique habitats that are home to rare and endangered animals and plants in the region. Vulnerable birds including golden eagles, griffon vultures, Bonelli’s eagles, and Egyptian vultures nest at the Straits in Glykí, while Eurasian spoonbills, black storks, and ferruginous ducks shelter in the wetlands of Ammoudiá. In all, the 11,440 acres encompassing the Straits and wetlands are part of the European Commission’s NATURA 2000 network of protected areas.
Tourism wasn’t a viable economic pursuit in the region until 2006, when the construction of nearby resorts and motorways provided access to isolated towns like Glykí. In 2019, 50,000 people visited the region, mostly from April to September, boosting Glykí as a key destination for Acheron tourism. With improved opportunities, most young people now stay in town to work in local businesses.
The popularity of the region seems to be rising. Last summer during the pandemic, visitation to the region grew to nearly 2,000 daily visitors, “something very promising for the next season,” says Giorgos Ntagkas, deputy mayor for culture, sports, and trade in the municipality of Souli. “Our goal is to extend the tourist season and further develop outdoor activities, improve the hiking trails, open up mountain and river biking routes, and promote paragliding.”
Yet, officials must now contend with the rise in visitation’s negative side effects. Visitors are increasingly going off established trails, leaving trash, camping, and lighting fires. Recently, branches cut from plane trees left them vulnerable to a dangerous fungus.
Exacerbating the problem, some restaurant construction projects in Glykí are impacting the riverbed, while beach-side canteens (snack bar-type businesses) in Ammoudiá have caused the destruction of sand dunes and the clearing of juniper trees and shrubs.
Officials are keeping an eye on the problems in planning for the future. “We have been studying the carrying capacity [at the Straits and surrounding area] … so that the ecosystem does not deteriorate,” says Alexandros Konstantinis, environmental manager and physicist at Management Body of Kalamas-Acheron-Corfu.
Because the study is ongoing, it’s too soon to say for certain what changes will be implemented this year. In the meantime, officials say they’re enforcing existing regulations and raising awareness at information centres in Ammoudiá and Glykí and educational events throughout the region that highlight Acheron’s historic and natural heritage.
In time, officials hope that new initiatives will bring awareness to a wider audience so that the river’s treasured biodiversity doesn’t become the stuff of myth.
“We want visitors to come for the beauty of this scenery,” stresses Ntagkas, the deputy mayor of Souli. “We certainly don’t intend to sacrifice nature for profit.”



In Switzerland, sledding is a national pastime
With an Alpine sled train, runs inspired by video games, and 150 dedicated tracks, Switzerland is a sledder’s paradise.

Anyone who has ridden a proper sled downhill has probably heard the whispering whoosh of steel blades as they speed across snow. It’s a soundtrack that locals and tourists experience every winter in Graubünden canton, a mountainous sledder’s paradise in eastern Switzerland.
I went there in January to experience the country’s lesser-known alternative to its national sport, alpine skiing. Switzerland’s mountains and urban foothills provide more than 150 dedicated sled runs (schlittelwege in German), unspooling across 385 miles of snowy terrain. 
Sledding’s skill set is more basic than skiing. (Even young children can do it, especially on a sled with a parent.) Sit down, push off, and use your feet to brake. But the sport requires no small amount of nerve on steeper runs.
Like skiing, sledding comes with its own culture and bonhomie. “It’s about family and friends enjoying nature together,” says Simon Engel, a historian at the website Swiss Sports History. “You meet to socialise on the hill.”
Here’s how to experience both the traditions and the thrills of Swiss sledding.
Switzerland’s other winter sport 
The world’s first recorded sleds can be traced back 4,000 years to ancient Egypt, where labourers pulled them across sand made slick by water, hauling stones to build the pyramids.
In Switzerland, farmers used sleds to transport timber or carry food to their animals for centuries. In the late 19th century around St. Moritz, the arrival of British tourists turned schlitten into downhill pleasure rides. In the years since, sledding has spread from the Alps and the lower plains of the Jura mountains to urban areas such as Zürich, where you can toboggan down Uetliberg.
Travellers can find sled runs across the country via SwitzerlandMobility, a national network of non-motorised routes for activities including hiking, cross-country skiing, and sledding. Routes are ranked by difficulty; 38 of the runs are illuminated at night, too.
Switzerland’s sledding routes can be reached on foot, by chair lift, gondola, cable car, funicular, and, in one place, by the world’s only “sled train,” the cherry-red schlittelzug. It’s what I rode to get between the small Graubünden town of Bergün to the even tinier hamlet of Preda, the pushing-off point for one of the world’s most scenic and heart-pounding sled runs.
Switzerland’s best-known sled run
The 17-minute schlittelzug trip goes along one section of the UNESCO World Heritage-recognised Rhaetian Railway route, a historic transalpine railroad, known for vertiginous mountain passes and staggeringly tall bridges or viaducts. My train ride gives me a preview of the landscapes I’ll soon be zooming past on Switzerland’s most famous sled run, the Preda-Bergün Schlittelbahn. A mountain pass during warmer months, the route is closed to vehicular traffic in the winter.
Hati Widoner rents me a wooden rodel sled from his shop when I arrive in Preda. Rodels have a flexible seat slung between two moveable wooden runners, their lower parts covered with steel blades for speed. 
“It’s like riding a horse,” he says, putting the sled’s rope “reins” in my hands as I sit on the yard-long sled. “When you want to go right, pull right.” Widoner also shows me how to position my feet straight ahead, the better to use them—ack!—to brake.
Seasoned sledders keep their feet locked in position toward the front of the rodel’s runners, using body weight and gently pulling on the rope to turn. I plant my boots lightly atop the snow on either side of the sled, ready to use them to stop during my first “easy” run. Somehow, I clock nearly 30 miles per hour.
At the bottom of the run in Bergün, there’s a steepled 15th-century medieval church, locals pulling groceries (and kids) atop sleds, and a two-seater chairlift to the top of the town’s more challenging sled run, Darlux-Bergün.
Darlux-Bergün gets a “moderate” ranking from SwitzerlandMobility. But icy conditions make it feel challenging, as my sled veers into runaway ramps on tight corners. 
Sledding is not without its risks—you can get hit by other sledders or careen out of control. Rental shops in Bergün and other locations teach beginners the basics, including heading to the side of the run if you wipe out, keeping pace with other sledders, and wearing a helmet.
“When you go up the chairlift, you hear all these screeches below you,” says Nicholas Houghton, a British artist I met in the dining room of the Kurkhaus Bergün, the marvellously restored Art Nouveau hotel I bunked at in town. “It’s 50 percent terror and 50 percent pure pleasure.”
Houghton, 69, first visited Bergün (population roughly 500) in 1990 and got hooked. He returns every winter. “I took to sledding,” Houghton says. “The first few years were the best and the worst because I couldn’t control the sled properly. Then I learned to brake.”
My braking skills are still evolving when Houghton and I go on a night sled ride together on the Bergün-Preda run. Our route, magical in the darkness, slides past the illuminated stone arches of viaducts and under the glinting stars.
Tracking sledding history in Davos 
While railroads brought sledding to Bergün, a 19th-century pandemic was partially responsible for the sport’s popularity in nearby Davos.
“People were coming here to sanatoriums to be healed of tuberculosis, and that’s when sledding for pleasure really started to take off,” says Ursula Bevan, a docent at the Wintersport Museum Davos on the town’s main drag, the Promenade. The tiny museum is full of antique sleds, ski equipment, and vintage photos of famous visitors, including Arthur Conan Doyle, who stayed in Davos while his wife was recuperating from tuberculosis.
In the 1870s, around the same time that downhill skiing first started gathering momentum in the now famous resort, English tourists (including TB patients) began riding wooden sleds for fun. “Usually, they were staying at the hotels or the clinics, and they would just sled wherever,” Bevan says. “Any old hill would do.”
Davos townspeople, accustomed to using sleds for work, joined the visitors in friendly races, and the sport really sped off. Davos’ original sled run, first employed for bobsled races that finished right along the Promenade, is still active.
Today, a funicular takes sledders from central Davos to Schatzalp, where a historic hotel by the same name was once one of the area’s most luxurious sanatoriums. Today, it’s the departure point for a gently curving, 1.7-mile sled route past snow-laden fir trees and back down to town.
For sledders in search of something more thrilling, the 2.3-mile screamer at Davos’ Rinerhorn ski area offers 33 tight turns; they’re banked in snow to keep patrons from careering off the mountain.
While the town’s rental shops hire out easier-to-manoeuvre rodel sleds, many people ride traditional “Davos sleds,” a point of pride and a bit of living history. 
Davos sleds are made from ash wood with three short middle boards across the top, a rope affixed to a central point, and steel blades that curl up and around the top of the runners. Their seats are hard and their runners are fixed in place, meaning they are less nimble than rodel sleds.
Davos sleds, never trademarked, are produced all over Switzerland (and beyond)—but at only one place in Davos itself. At Ardüser Schreinerei, Remo Brülhart assembles about 25 sleds each winter using a design based on historical photos and records.
When sledding becomes a game
Though Swiss sledding seems rooted in tradition, the sport inspires innovations, too. Take the Light Ride, an interactive, nighttime sled run launched in 2020 in Lenzerheide, less than an hour’s bus ride west from Davos.
The seasonal run, inspired by video games, equips both the course and its sleds with sensors and sound effects. Sledders streak along, sliding over sensors or punching soft targets with their gloved hands to win points.
“I had the idea one evening around the fireplace how to create more action on the track,” says Stephan Koritsch, a project manager for No Ordinary Art who dreamed up the attraction. He wanted to make sledding both more challenging and appealing to young people.
On the night I sled through the Light Ride, I feel like a kid again, veering to “catch” emojis projected on the snow and whooping my way through tunnels of geometric neon light.
When I fly back to the United States the next day, the immigration officer has a question.
“What was the purpose of your travel to Switzerland?” she asks.
“Sledding,” I say.
What else? 


Kirkwall: the bustling capital of the Orkneys
The islands’ only town is a gateway of people and goods. Though separated from the Scottish mainland by only 10 miles across the Pentland Firth, Orkney is one destination that really feels a world away.

From the 9th to 15th centuries, the northern island group lay in the hands of the Norse king, a thralldom held by earls. Ceded to Scotland in 1468, the islands’ Viking roots still echo in Kirkwall.
Of some 70 islands in the archipelago (depending on how you count), 20 are inhabited. Most folk, however, live on the largest island, Mainland Orkney. Its capital is the Royal Burgh of Kirkwall. With a population of 8,500, one-third of the Orkneys’ population calls Kirkwall home.
As the administrative and commercial center of the islands, Kirkwall is the islands’ distribution base for both people and goods. Kirkwall is indeed the gateway to the Orkneys.
Getting to Kirkwall is half the fun
It takes a bit of work to get to the Orkneys. This is no casual destination or a place to stop off on the way to somewhere else. You come to an island by plane or by ship. The principal commercial and passenger ferry route to Kirkwall is from Aberdeen on Northlink Ferries run from Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Inverness principally via Flybe. Either way, you will enter Kirkwall at the Visitor Information Centre and Bus Terminal.
Make yourself at home
There are several mid-range centrally located hotels and a variety of B&B and guest house options in the heart of town. Kirkwall is very much a town that caters to visitors, and the West End Hotel, the Orkney Hotel, and the Kirkwall Hotel all rate highly with folk. The Kirkwall Hotel sits on the picturesque harbor, a classic three-star inn.
Anywhere you locate, however, will be within easy walking distance of everything. The principal commercial street changes names several times (curiously from Victoria to Broad to Albert) but is never more than a couple of blocks away. It is narrow, colorful, and full of surprisingly interesting shops and eateries.
Kirkwall’s historic highlights
A Norse Earl, St. Rognvald, founded St. Magnus Cathedral in 1137 in memory of his martyred uncle (then the Earl). The Romanesque sandstone cathedral was built by master builders brought north from their work on Durham Cathedral. The remains of Magnus and his nephew still lie within the church’s ancient fabric. It is generally regarded as the finest medieval
building in Northern Scotland. On its annexation by Scotland, King James III gave the cathedral to the people of Orkney. Since the Scottish Reformation in 1560, the cathedral has been used for Protestant worship and is today a Church of Scotland congregation—still owned by the Kirkwall people and maintained by the Islands Council. Within the grand cathedral, the magnificent stained glass windows depicting saints and biblical personalities were created by artist Oscar Paterson in the 1920s.
Next door, the remains of the 12th-century Bishop’s Palace and 16th-century Earl’s Palace reflect the long importance of Kirkwall as both a place of ecclesiastical and political power.
Across the street at Tankerness House, a beautiful 16th-century townhouse, The Orkney Museum tells the story of the islands’ 5,000 years of social history. Its well-displayed collections include a wealth of archaeological artifacts, including a Viking boat burial; and don’t miss Tankerness House Garden through the back garden.
On the town outskirts, Highland Park Distillery produces the uniquely-flavored, award-winning single malt whisky. Take a tour of the distillery and the process, and sample a dram of Highland Park, proudly claimed “the best spirit in the world.”
Across the island
Kirkwall is a town that really can be largely “seen” in a day. Still, if you’ve taken the trouble to get here, it seems a shame not to stay for a bit and explore further. The island’s oldest evidence of human occupation is also its biggest attraction. In fact, the island’s Iron Age and Neolithic sites—the village of Skara Brae, Maeshowe and the Standing Stones of Stenness are among the most important archaeological sites in Europe. Book an excursion at the visitors’ center.
For those who would explore further afield, Orkney Ferries operates inter-island ferry service to 13 of the smaller islands.
Moving on from Orkney
Northlink ferry from Aberdeen continues on to the Shetlands’ capital town of Lerwick. Ferries also make the crossing from Stromness to Scrabster, and from South Ronaldsay to John O’Groats on the Scottish mainland. There is plenty to explore in the Highlands!


Wandering in literary Hampshire
From Shakespeare to Conan Doyle, this southern county has known the poets and storytellers of England’s past.

In Hampshire County, rolling wooded hills preside over a rich agricultural landscape punctuated by picturesque villages. It is essentially a rural county, where stately homes and bustling market towns reflect the land’s fecundity. For centuries Hampshire also has been fertile soil for many of England’s greatest writers: Austen, Dickens, Trollope, Keats, and Conan Doyle, to name a few. Today its meandering byways invite the visitor on a literary sojourn to locales associated with these celebrated authors.
Given the county’s size and numerous places to visit, it is difficult to know where to begin, though a reasonable starting place would be the tiny hamlet of East Worldham near the market town of Alton. The name derives from Anglo-Saxon Wae-hyll-ham, which translates as Waterhill Village. On top of the hill is St. Mary the Virgin, a 12th-century church constructed over Roman foundations. Entering the church, it is worth looking for medieval graffiti in the form of sword scratch marks left by pilgrim knights.
Those knights are a clue to the church’s literary associations. In the south aisle’s wall, there is a funereal effigy of Phillipa, wife of Geoffrey Chaucer. Their son, Thomas, was lord of the manor here from 1418 to 1434, and the church was on the Pilgrim’s Way from Winchester to Canterbury. Whether Chaucer drew on any characters or events here for his Canterbury Tales is a matter of conjecture. Certainly, the pilgrims visiting East Worldham were not as richly attired as Chaucer’s characters; most pilgrims simply carried the scriptures, a staff, and a blanket.
A few miles south of East Worldham is Selborne, a place of pilgrimage for lovers of natural history. This village of thatched cottages was home to 18th-century naturalist Gilbert White, whose observations were collated into The Natural History and Antiquities of Selbourne in 1789, a very popular book reputedly surpassed in sales only by the Bible, the Oxford English Dictionary and Charles Darwin (https://britishheritage.com/history/charles-darwin)’s The Origin of Species, published in 1859. White’s work, still in print, shifted natural history from a subject of academic conjecture to empirical science.
Gilbert White lived in “The Wakes,” a country house with gardens designed by him. Now it is a museum dedicated to White and Captain Lawrence Oates, a polar explorer who died on Robert F. Scott’s fateful expedition to the South Pole. The museum’s rooms have been restored to their appearance in White’s time and include various artifacts from his life.
For many, the real pleasure in Selborne is to walk in White’s footsteps around the garden, the village and up Selborne Hangar (a chalk hill capped by beech woods). Arriving at the Hangar via the zigzag path, visitors are struck by both the view and the path’s handiwork. White’s simple grave in St. Mary’s churchyard is encrusted with lichens that almost obliterate his name, an ecological succession that he’d probably approve. Inside the church, two stunningly simple stained-glass windows, both redolent with wildlife images, honor White; one was erected in 1920 and another in 1993, to commemorate the bicentenaries of his birth and death.
Near Selborne is Steep, a village that was home to the World War I poet Edward Thomas. Around Steep there are many walks associated with Thomas. For the energetically inclined there is a walk up the intriguingly named Shoulder of Mutton Hill; upon arriving at Thomas’ memorial stone the walker can empathize with lines in his poem, “When First I Came Here”: “Fast beat/My heart at the sight of the tall slope...” The narrator unfortunately was too breathless to relate the magnificent view that is the hiker’s reward. Less energetic visitors can enjoy in All Saints Church two lancet windows whose panes have exquisitely fine etchings, which appear to move in the changing natural light. They are a wonderful commemoration of Thomas’poetic imagery.
From Steep, the literary route makes for Portsmouth, but detours down country lanes to Hawksley, Droxford and Butser Hill are worthwhile. Respectively these places are associated with William Cobbett, Izaac Walton and Charles Dickens. Cobbett owned several Hampshire farms, and much of his Rural Rides is set in Hampshire where he had gained personal experience of the farm workers’terrible living conditions. At Butser Hill, Dickens’Nicholas Nickleby and Smike join Mr. Crummels’theatrical company. Portsmouth has associations with Jane Austen, Charles Dickens, Daniel Defoe and Arthur Conan Doyle. Unfortunately, World War II bombing destroyed most of these connections. One outstanding exception is 393 Commercial Rd., where in a four-poster bed on the third floor on February 7, 1812, Charles Dickens was born.
The house, in a peaceful cul de sac, is now a small museum furnished in an early 19th- century style that reflects Dickens’ parents’ comparative, though brief, affluence. Charles Dickens’father was a well-paid clerk in the Navy Pay Office, but also a spendthrift—a habit that condemned the family to years of financial hardship and the harsh realities of impoverishment in early 19th-century England. These included debtor’s prison, the poor house and the employment of Dickens in factories that notoriously exploited child labor, and became persistent themes in his writings.
Among the artifacts in the museum’s possession are the elegant four-poster Georgian bed, the couch on which Dickens died in 1870 and numerous contemporary trinkets used to market his literary success. (Interesting comparisons with current marketing strategies of popular authors is unavoidable.) Entry to the museum is through the original kitchen and servants’ quarters (his parents employed two servants), where it is easy to be distracted by current Dickens souvenirs that have replaced orderly rows of plates on an authentic built-in dresser. It is a fine example of a Georgian fitted kitchen.
From Portsmouth, it is a short distance to Titchfield Abbey. Following the dissolution of the monasteries, Titchfield Abbey was given to the first Earl of Southampton. The third Earl, Henry Wriothesley, was a patron of William Shakespeare’s. In Wriothesley’s dining room, guests would have been lavishly dined and then entertained, possibly with the first performance of Shakespeare’s As You Like It.
Despite its name, the New Forest is one of England’s most ancient woodlands. William the Conqueror applied the appellation “new” when he declared the woods to be his new hunting ground. Within the area’s forests and heaths, many authors have lived and found inspiration, including Austen, W.H. Hudson, Captain Frederick Marryat, and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Several authors have used Buckler’s Hard as a location, now a tastefully preserved 18th-century shipbuilding village where Lord Horatio Nelson’s ship Agamemnon was built. Jane Austen, with family and friends, took pleasure cruises from Southampton to Buckler’s Hard while en route to social events at Beaulieu.
Today, Buckler’s Hard is a quiet haven. Sixty years ago, however, the waters were filled with landing craft, Mulberry Harbors, and other paraphernalia of war being readied for D-Day’s Operation Overlord. Kingsley Amis and Nevil Shute were stationed there and involved in those preparations. Shute uses the setting in several of his stories, particularly in the poignant Requiem for a Wren. The story’s heroine is stationed at HMS Mastadon in Exbury. “Mastadon” was the code name for Exbury House, which is affectionately referred to as the “stone frigate.”
Before leaving the New Forest, Sherlock Holmes aficionados must visit Minstead’s All Saints Church where, below an oak tree, Conan Doyle is buried. A devoted spiritualist, his presence in the churchyard is a minor embarrassment to the church. As a compromise, he was buried near the church’s boundary. Curiously, lightning has twice struck the oak tree; divine displeasure perhaps?
Eventually, Hampshire’s literary roads lead to Winchester, John Keats’ “exceeding pleasant town.” Literary explorations might start at the Hospital of St. Cross and Almshouses of Noble Poverty. Built in 1132, the almshouses provided shelter for 13 poor men; today they provide a home for 25 men. The tradition of giving a ration of ale and bread to wayfarers is still maintained upon request. Ralph Waldo Emerson was unimpressed by the parsimonious ration.
Anthony Trollope, who attended Winchester School, knew of the St. Cross Hospital, and it is probably the basis for his novel The Warden. Historically, the men of “noble poverty” included one John Watson, M.D., who practiced in India. Conan Doyle, as a doctor in Winchester, often visited St. Cross and possibly took this name for the chronicler and companion of Sherlock Holmes.
Keats frequently walked from St. Cross to Winchester. The path follows the River Itchen to Winchester Cathedral. Following this path in the fall has a particular piquancy as it inspired Keats’ “Ode to Autumn. ”In Winchester, a minor detour passes the house, now a private residence, where Jane Austen died. Within Winchester Cathedral, Keats paced the great nave reading and composing letters to his lover Fanny Brawne. In the appropriately named Fishermen’s Apostle Chapel, Izaac Walton is buried. A commemorative window depicts The Compleat Angler’s author quietly reading by a river. The cathedral is synonymous with Jane Austen’s grave, which curiously makes no mention of her literary genius. Her memorial window, though, is full of allegorical references to writing.
The literary trail continues north to Wherwell, a pretty village by the River Test. Walton,unsurprisingly, fished there, and W.H. Hudson used neighboring Harewood Forest as the setting for his story “Dead Man’s Plack” and in his Hampshire Days. At Kingsclere, the route comes onto chalk downland, the setting for Richard Adams’ Watership Down. A stroll along the escarpment is always rewarding, with good views into the Thames Valley. Rabbits will certainly be seen. The route turns southeast to places associated with Jane Austen. At the end of a narrow lane in Steventon is St. Nicholas Church where Austen’s father was rector for 25 years. Austen was born in the rectory, now destroyed, in December 1775. Here she wrote Northanger Abbey, Sense and Sensibility and Pride, and Prejudice, though they were not published until much later. Much of her incisive social writing was gleaned from her full social life that included dancing at many large houses in the neighborhood, such as The Vyne. The Austens’ associations with the church are marked by the unusual weather vane, a quill pen, and the family graves. In 1801 the Austens moved to Bath and then in 1806 to Southampton. This was a sterile time for Jane Austen’s writing, though within the social milieu of those cities she was making pertinent observations for her novels. In 1809 Austen, her mother, sister Cassandra and friend Martha Lloyd moved to Chawton. From the beginning, Austen was happy at Chawton, writing:
Our Chawton home,
How much we find, Already in it, to our mind;
And how convinced that when complete
It will our other houses beat.
Within this contentment, she quickly revised Sense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice and obtained her first literary success. Austen and her sister Cassandra both enjoyed walking, and it is pleasant to follow in their footsteps. They were particularly fond of a walk into Farringdon, an easy stroll that can be extended to Gilbert White’s Selborne, bringing the tour of Hampshire’s rich literary heritage full circle. Most visitors to Chawton, though, are content to walk to the local church, St. Nicholas, wherein a quiet corner of the yew-studded churchyard Austen’s mother and sister are buried.
In the neighborhood
Among the myriad delights of Hampshire is the 90,000-acre New Forest, given its name Nova Foresta by William the Conqueror. The NEW FOREST MUSEUM AND VISITORS CENTRE in Lyndhurst (“Capital of the New Forest”) offers a short audiovisual show that leads to displays on forest management, native flora and fauna, traditional livelihoods, local history and the ancient rights of forest dwellers. The right of 2 pannage, for example, allows a cottager to turn pigs loose in the autumn, to fatten during winter on the abundant acorns from New Forest oak.In Minstead, a tiny village in the heart of the New Forest, the TRUSTY SERVANT is a famous old public house with an unusual sign that belies the genial simplicity of the pub’s name. It depicts a man with a pig’s snout, the ears of an ass and the feet of a stag, and a16 th-century saying believed to have originated from Winchester College in the days when pupils there had personal servants:A Trusty Servant’s portrait would you see This Emblematic Figure well survey The Porker’s Snout not nice in diet shows The Padlock shut no secrets he’ll disclose Patient the Ass his Master’s wrath will bear Swiftness in errand the Staggs feet declare Loaded his Left hand apt to labour saith The Vest his neatness Open hand his faith Girt with his Sword his Shield upon his arm Himself and master he’ll protect from harm. Get the picture? And the pub food is reckoned quite good.














